XXIII.
The Ebb Tide Runs.
The coracle, as I had ample reason to know before I was done with her, was a very safe
boat for a person of my height and weight, both buoyant and clever in a sea-way.
But she was the most cross-grained, lop-sided craft to manage.
Do as you please, she always made more leeway than anything else, and turning round and
the maneuver she was best at.
Even Ben Gunn himself has admitted that she was queer to handle till you knew her way.
Certainly, I did not know her way.
She turned in every direction but the one I was bound to go.
The most part of the time we were broadside on, and I am very sure I never should have
made the ship at all but for the tide.
By good fortune, paddle as I please.
The tide was still sweeping me down, and there lay the Hispaniola right in the fairway, hardly
to be missed.
First, she loomed before me like a blot of something yet blacker than darkness.
Then her spars and hull began to take shape, and the next moment, as it seemed, for the
further I went the brisker grew the current of the ebb, I was alongside of her hauser
and had laid hold.
The hauser was as taut as a bowstring, and the current so strong she pulled upon her
anchor.
All round the hull in the blackness the rippling current bubbled and chattered like a little
mountain stream.
One cut with my seagully and the Hispaniola would go humming down the tide.
So far so good, but it next occurred to my recollection that a taut hauser suddenly cut
his a thing as dangerous as a kicking horse.
Ten to one, if I were so foolhardy as to cut the Hispaniola from her anchor, I and the
coracle would be knocked clean out of the water.
This brought me to a full stop, and if fortune had not again particularly favored me, I should
have had to abandon my design.
But the light airs which had begun blowing from the south east and south had hauled round
after nightfall into the south west.
Just while I was meditating a puff came, caught the Hispaniola and forced her up into the
current, and to my great joy I felt the hauser slacken in my grasp, and the hand by which
I held it dip for a second under water.
With that I made my mind up, took out my gully, opened it with my teeth, and cut one strand
after another till the vessel swung only by two.
Then I lay quiet, waiting to sever these last when the strain should be once more lightened
by a breath of wind.
All this time I hooded the sound of loud voices from the cavern, but to say truth, my mind
had been so entirely taken up with other thoughts that I had scarcely given ear.
Now, however, when I had nothing else to do I began to pay more heed.
One I recognized for the coxswain's Israel hands that had been flint's gunner in former
days, the other was of course my friend of the red nightcap.
Both men were plainly the worse for drink, and they were still drinking, for even while
I was listening one of them with a drunken cry opened the stern window and threw out
something which I defined to be an empty bottle.
But they were not only tipsy, it was plain that they were furiously angry.
Oaths flew like hailstones, and every now and then there came forth such an explosion,
as I thought was sure to end in blows.
But each time the quarrel passed off and the voices grumbled lower for a while until the
next crisis came, and in its turn passed away without result.
On shore I could see the glow of the great campfire burning warmly through the shore-side
trees.
Someone was singing a dull old droning sailor's song with a droop and a quaver at the end
of every verse, and seemingly no end to it at all but the patience of the singer.
I heard it on the voyages more than once and remembered these words, but one man of her
And I thought it was a ditty rather too dolefully appropriate for a company that had met such
cruel losses in the morning.
But indeed from what I saw all these buccaneers were as callous as the seas they sailed on.
At last the breeze came, the schooner sidled and drew nearest in the dark.
I felt the hauser slacken once more and with a good tough effort cut the last fibres through.
The breeze had but little action on the coracle, and I was almost instantly swept against the
bows of the Hispaniola.
At the same time the schooner began to turn upon her heel, spinning slowly end for end
across the current.
I wrought like a fiend, for I expected every moment to be swamped, and since I found I
could not push the coracle directly off I now shoved straight astern.
At length I was clear of my dangerous neighbour, and just as I gave the last impulsion my hands
came across a light cord that was trailing overboard across the stern bulwarks.
Instantly I grasped it.
Why I should have done so I can hardly say.
It was at first mere instinct, but once I had it in my hands and found it fast curiosity
began to get the upper hand and I determined I should have one look through the cabin window.
I pulled in hand over hand on the cord and when I judged myself near enough rose at infinite
risk to about half my height and thus commanded the roof and a slice of the interior of the
cabin.
By this time the schooner and her little consort were gliding pretty swiftly through the water.
Indeed we had already fetched up level with the campfire.
The ship was talking, as sailors say loudly, treading the innumerable ripples with an incessant
weltering splash, and until I got my eye above the windowsill I could not comprehend why
the watchman had taken no alarm.
One glance, however, was sufficient, and it was only one glance that I durst take from
that unsteady skiff.
It showed me hands and his companions locked together in deadly wrestle, each with a hand
upon the other's throat.
I dropped upon the thwart again, none too soon, for I was near overboard.
I could see nothing for the moment but these two furious and crimson faces swaying together
under the smoky lamp, and I shut my eyes to let them grow once more familiar with the
darkness.
The endless ballad had come to an end at last, and the whole diminished company about the
campfire had broken into the chorus I had heard so often.
Fifteen men on a dead man's chest, yo ho ho and a bottle of rum, drink in the devil
had done for the rest, yo ho ho and a bottle of rum.
I was just thinking how busy drink and the devil were at that very moment in the cabin
of the Hispaniola when I was surprised by a sudden lurch of the coracle.
At the same moment she yawed sharply and seemed to change her course.
The speed in the meantime had strangely increased.
I opened my eyes at once, all around me were little ripples, combing over with a sharp
bristling sound and slight phosphorescence.
The Hispaniola herself, a few yards in whose wake I was still being whirled along, seemed
to stagger in her course, and I saw her spars toss a little against the blackness of the
night.
Nay, as I looked longer I made sure she was also wheeling to the southward.
I glanced over my shoulder and my heart jumped against my ribs.
There right behind me was the glow of the campfire.
The current had turned at right angles, sweeping round along with it the tall schooner and
the little dancing coracle.
Ever quickening, ever bubbling higher, ever muttering louder it went spinning through
the narrows for the open sea.
Suddenly the schooner in front of me gave a violent yaw, turning perhaps through twenty
degrees and almost at the same moment one shout followed another from on board.
I could hear feet pounding on the companion ladder and I knew that the two drunkards had
last been interrupted in their quarrel and awakened to a sense of their disaster.
I lay down flat in the bottom of that wretched skiff and devoutly recommended my spirit to
its maker.
At the end of the straights I made sure we must fall off into some bar of raging breakers
where all my troubles would be ended speedily, and though I could perhaps bear to die I could
not bear to look upon my fate as it approached.
So I must have lain for hours, continually beaten to a fro upon the billows, now and
again wetted with flying sprays, and never ceasing to expect a death at the next plunge.
Gradually weariness grew upon me, a numbness, an occasional stupor fell upon my mind even
in the midst of my terrors, until sleep at last supervened, and in my sea-tossed coracle
I lay and dreamed of Holm and the old Admiral Benbow.
End of chapter twenty-three
Chapter twenty-four
The Cruise of the Coracle
It was broad day when I awoke and found myself tossing at the south-west end of Treasure
The sun was up, but was still hid from me behind the great bulk of the spy-glass, which
on this side descended almost to the sea in formidable cliffs.
Hall-bowl and head and mizzen-mast hill were at my elbow, the hill bare and dark, the head,
bound with cliffs forty or fifty feet high and fringed with great masses of fallen rock.
I was scarce a quarter of a mile to seaward, and it was my first thought to paddle in and
land.
The notion was soon given over.
Among the fallen rocks the breakers spouted and bellowed, loud reverberations, heavy sprays
flying and falling succeeded one another from second to second.
And I saw myself, if I ventured nearer, dashed to death upon the rough shore, or, spending
my strength in vain, to scale the beetling crags.
Nor was that all, for crawling together on the flat tables of rock, or letting themselves
drop into the sea with loud reports, I beheld huge, slimy monsters, soft snails, as it were,
of incredible bigness, two or three score of them together, making the rocks to echo
with their barkings.
I have understood since that they were sea lions and entirely harmless, but the look
of them added to the difficulty of the shore and the high running of the surf was more
than enough to disgust me of that landing place.
I felt willing rather to starve at sea than to confront such perils.
In the meantime I had a better chance, as I supposed, before me.
North of Hall Bowlin Head the land runs in a long way, leaving at low tide a long stretch
of yellow sand.
To the north of that again there comes another cape, cape of the woods as it was marked
upon the chart, buried in tall green pines which descended to the margin of the sea.
I remembered what Silver had said about the current that sets northward along the whole
west coast of Treasure Island, and seeing from my position that I was already under
its influence, I preferred to leave Hall Bowlin Head behind me and reserve my strength for
an attempt to land upon the kindlier looking cape of the woods.
There was a great smooth swell upon the sea, the wind blowing steadily and gently from
the south.
There was no contrarity between that and the current, and the billows rose and fell unbroken.
Had it been otherwise I must long ago have perished.
But as it was, it was surprising how easily and securely my little and light boat could
Often, as I still lay at the bottom and kept no more than an eye above the gunwale, I would
see a big blue summit heaving close above me.
Yet the coracle would but bounce a little, dance as if on springs and subside on the
other side into the trough as lightly as a bird.
I began after a little to grow very bold and sat up to try my skill at paddling.
But even a small change in the disposition of the weight would produce violent changes
in the behavior of a coracle, and I had hardly moved before the boat, giving up at once her
gentle dancing movement ran straight down a slope of water so steep that it made me
giddy and struck her nose with a spout of spray deep into the side of the next wave.
I was drenched and terrified, and fell instantly back into my old position whereupon the coracle
seemed to find her head again and led me as softly as before among the billows.
It was plain she was not to be interfered with, and at that rate, since I could no way
influence her course, what hope had I left of reaching land?
I began to be horribly frightened, but I kept my head for all of that.
First moving with all care, I gradually bailed out the coracle with my sea cap.
Then, getting my eye once more above the gunnel, I set myself to study how it was she managed
to slip so quietly through the rollers.
I found each wave, instead of the big smooth glossy mountain it looks from the shore or
from the vessel's deck, was for all the world like any range of hills on dry land, full
of peaks and smooth places and valleys.
The coracle, left to herself, turning from side to side, threaded, so to speak, her way
through these lower parts and avoided the steep slopes and higher, toppling summits
of the wave.
Well now, thought I to myself, it is plain I must lie where I am and not disturb the
balance, but it is plain also that I can put the paddle over the side and from time to
time in smooth places give her a shove or two towards the land.
No sooner thought upon than done.
There I lay on my elbows in the most trying attitude and every now and again gave a weak
stroke or two to turn her head towards shore.
It was very tiring and slow work, yet I did visibly gain ground and as we neared the Cape
of the Woods, though I saw I must infallibly miss that point, I had still made some hundred
yards of isting.
I was indeed close in.
I could see the cool green tree tops swaying together in the breeze, and I felt sure I
should make the next promontory without fail.
It was high time, for I now began to be tortured with thirst.
The glow of the sun from above, its thousand-fold reflections from the waves, the sea water
that fell and dried upon me, caking my very lips with salt combined to make my throat
burn and my brain ache.
The sight of the trees so near at hand had almost made me sick with longing, but the
current had soon carried me past the point, and as the next reach of sea opened out I
beheld a sight that changed the nature of my thoughts.
Right in front of me, not a half a mile away, I beheld the Hispaniola under sail.
I made sure, of course, that I should be taken, but I was so distressed for want of water
that I scarce knew whether to be glad or sorry at the thought, and long before I had come
to a conclusion, surprise had taken entire possession of my mind, and I could do nothing
but stare and wonder.
The Hispaniola was under her mainsail, and two jibs, and the beautiful white canvas shone
in the sun like snow or silver.
When I first sighted her, all her sails were drawing, and she was laying a course about
north-west, and I presumed the men on board were going around the island on their way
back to the anchorage.
Presently, she began to fetch more and more to the westward, so that I thought they had
sighted me and were going about in chase.
At last, however, she fell right into the wind's eye, was taken dead aback, and stood
there while helpless with her sails shivering.
Clumsy fellow, said I, they must still be as drunk as owls, and I thought how Captain
Smollett would have sent them skipping.
Meanwhile, the schooner gradually fell off, and filled again upon another tact, sailed
swiftly for a minute or so, and brought up once more dead in the wind's eye.
Again and again this was repeated, to and fro, up and down, north, south, east and west,
the Hispaniola sailed by swoops and dashes, and at each repetition ended as she had begun
with idly flapping canvas.
It became plain to me that nobody was steering, and if so, where were the men?
Either they were dead drunk, or had deserted her, I thought, and perhaps, if I could get
on board, I might return the vessel to her captain.
The current was bearing coracle and schooner, suffered at an equal rate.
As for the latter's sailing, it was so wild and intermittent, and she hung each time so
long in irons that she certainly gained nothing, if she did not even lose.
If I only dared to sit up and paddle, I made sure that I could overhaul her.
The scheme had an air of an adventure that inspired me, and the thought of the water-breaker
inside the four companion doubled my growing courage.
Up I got, was welcomed almost instantly by another cloud of spray, but this time stuck
to my purpose, and met myself with all my strength and caution, to paddle after the
unsteered Hispaniola.
Once I shipped a sea so heavy that I had to stop and bail, with my heart fluttering like
a bird.
But gradually I got into the way of the thing, and guided my coracle among the waves, with
only now and then a blow upon her bows and a dash of foam in my face.
I was now gaining rapidly on the schooner.
I could see the brass glisten on the tiller as it banged about, and still no soul appeared
upon her decks.
I could not choose but suppose she was deserted.
If not, then the men were lying drunk below, where I might batten them down, perhaps, and
do what I chose with the ship.
For some time she had been doing the worst thing possible for me, standing still.
She headed nearly due south, yawing, of course, all the time.
Each time she fell off, her sails partly filled, and these brought her in a moment right to
the wind again.
I have said this was the worst possible thing for me, for helpless as she looked in this
situation with the canvas cracking like cannons and the blocks tundling and banging on the
deck, she still continued to run away from me, not only with the speed of the current,
but by the whole amount of her leeway, which was naturally great.
But now, at last, I had my chance.
The breeze fell for some seconds, very low, and the current gradually turning her, the
Hispaniola revolved slowly round her center and at last presented me her stern, with the
cabin window still gaping open and the lamp over the table still burning on into the day.
The mainsail hung drooped like a banner.
She was stock still but for the current.
For the last little while I had even lost, but now, redoubling my efforts, I began once
more to overhaul the chase.
I was not a hundred yards from her.
When the wind came up again in the clap, she filled on the port tack and was off again,
stooping and skimming like a swallow.
My first impulse was one of despair, but my second was towards joy.
She came round till she was broadside on to me, round still till she had covered a half
and then two thirds and then three quarters of the distance that separated us.
I could see the waves boiling white under her forefoot.
Immensely tall, she looked to me from my low station in the coracle.
And then, of a sudden, I began to comprehend.
I had scarce time to think, scarce time to act and save myself.
I was on the summit of one swell when the schooner came stooping over the next.
The bowsprint was over my head.
I sprang to my feet and leaped, stamping the coracle under water.
With one hand I caught the jib boom while my foot was lodged between the stay and the
brace.
And as I still clung there panting, a dull blow told me that the schooner had charged
down upon and struck the coracle.
And I was left without retreat on the Hispaniola.